---
title: Governance
linkTitle: Governance
menu:
  main:
    weight: 20
---

# Open Modeling Foundation  

# *Organizational Charter - Draft 0.8*  

## Vision  

A globally connected humanity is now a major driver of diverse earth
system processes, creating a complex, planetary socio-ecological system
that exceeds our innate capacity to anticipate the consequences of
societal decisions and actions. Modeling is critical to enhancing
analytical and decision-making capabilities for policy and planning,
environmental management, resource investment, and security
preparedness. We need a new generation of scientific computational
models drawn from the social, ecological, biological, environmental, and
geophysical sciences that can work together to provide an integrated
representation of the complex world in which we now live. This vision
can be realized through a common suite of standards, protocols, and best
practices that enables modeling scientists to share knowledge and build
on one another's research.

====================================

## Mission and Goals  

The Open Modeling Foundation (OMF) is an international open science
community that works to enable the next generation modeling of human and
natural systems. The Open Modeling Foundation is an alliance of modeling
organizations that coordinates and administers a common, community
developed body of standards and best practices among diverse communities
of modeling scientists. It also provides informational, data, and
technological resources to facilitate the implementation of common
standards and best practices among the scientific communities it serves.  

The OMF supports the work of all modeling scientists endeavoring to
advance the understanding of diverse dimensions of our complexly
interacting human and natural world. The OMF promotes cooperation and
transparent knowledge exchange among modeling scientists through common
standards and best practices. The OMF develops and maintains an
open-access, community framework for enabling an ecosystem of reusable,
interoperable models to study complex interactions between people and
the environment at multiple scales. The OMF allows scientists and
planners world-wide to contribute to developing modeling approaches and
applying them to help sustainably manage our planet. Because
sustainability is a global challenge, it is important to engage the
world in developing and deploying the science needed for this endeavor,
and democratize advanced modeling to ensure that all members of our
global human community have access to the scientific and decision tools
they need.

The OMF endeavors to accelerate modeling science by making models more
easily **discoverable** and globally **accessible**. It also develops
and administers a suite of common standards and technology for model
**reusability, reproducibility, and interoperability**. The foundation
supports training and educational programs that help modeling scientists
develop their skills, learn best practices, and share expertise. OMF
member organizations promote transparency and ethical practice of
crediting the work of modeling scientists in all domains.

In these ways, the Open Modeling Foundation seeks to enable the many
scientists across the world who are represented by its member
organizations to contribute to nimble, effective modeling of natural
systems, human systems, and their integration at multiple spatial and
temporal scales. Through fostering innovative modeling science, the Open
Modeling Foundation endeavors to help humanity confront rapidly changing
and ever more complex and global issues, and improve human well-being.

====================================


## Activities 

The Open Modeling Foundation carries out a series of coordinated
activities to further its vision, mission, and goals under the guidance
and with the support of the OMF Executive Directorate, Members Council, Working Groups, and member
organizations. These activities include, but are not limited to the
following.

### Community Standards for Modeling Science  

The OMF coordinates and administers the development or adoption of
pan-community standards that accelerate knowledge scaffolding among
modeling scientists, and promote the creation and use of more reusable,
replicable, interoperable, and reliable models. These standards include:

-   **Discoverability and Accessibility:** Standards for accessibility
    ensure that model code is available in FAIR-aligned digital
    repositories (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reproducible) and
    that model developers receive public recognition and professional
    credit for code they make accessible in this way.

-   **Documentation:** Standards for model documentation ensure that
    information accompanying model code is sufficiently comprehensive to
    enable others besides a model developer to understand and
    potentially replicate the purpose and operation of a model.

-   **Reusability and Replicability:** Standards aim to facilitate the
    reuse of a model by others beyond the context in which the model was
    originally developed; for computational models this includes
    reusability regardless of the operating system or language in which
    a model was originally developed. Replicability is not possible
    without reusability.

-   **Interoperability:** Standards to enable potential interoperability
    among different models include pan-community external API and
    vocabulary (ontology) specifications.

The OMF coordinates and administers the certification of models that
meet these standards and the assignment of badges or other public
indicators of such certification to the general modeling community for
code that meets these standards. The OMF also encourages and coordinates
peer review of models by the scientific community and other evaluation
activities, like model intercomparison programs, to help identify models
that meet community standards, and enhance the reliability and value of
models.

OMF modeling standards are living documents that should be reviewed and
updated as technology and the needs of the international modeling
community evolve. The OMF welcomes and encourages input on standards
from members of the broader modeling community and will consider that
input as part of the formal standards-making, review, and approval
procedures.

In addition to standards applicable to model code, the OMF also
develops, adopts, and administers community-wide standards for ethical
practice by modeling scientists. In order to encourage knowledge
exchanges and scaffolding, all modeling scientists should publically
credit (normally through citation) the work of any other scientists that
they use. In order to maintain the reliability and public reputation of
modeling science, practitioners must document accurately model purposes,
operations, inputs, boundaries, assumptions, and results. Modeling
scientists are also strongly urged to make all models transparent and
open to external examination, and to make their models openly accessible
to others.

These standards for models and modeling science practice are
disseminated to all member organizations and publicly displayed on the
OMF website.

### Resources to Facilitate Model Discoverability, Accessibility, Reuse and Interoperability  

The OMF may coordinate or develop technologies and databases to help
modeling scientists make their models more easily reusable by others and
more easily interoperable with other models. Examples of such resources
could be software or online services to help scientists containerize
computational models in environments like Docker, to transform them into
web services, or to add a standardized API to models. Related to this,
the OMF may also coordinate or help develop and maintain a common
ontology database to facilitate interoperability.

The OMF may also adopt and promote common metadata standards for model
code repositories to improve discoverability and access for models
located across diverse, internationl archives.
  
It may also develop and maintain a global, online index to
non-computational models (e.g., numerical, and conceptual) that meet OMF
standards for documentation, reuse, and transparency.
  
The OMF may make available to modeling scientists information and
guidance about Open Source licensing and other practices for making
their work globally accessible.

### Training and Education  

The OMF will provide a forum for disseminating materials for teaching
best practices for model documentation, transparency, reuse, and
interoperability to students in educational institutions. Related to
this, the OMF may sponsor training activities to help scientists learn
how to make their models more transparent, well-documented, reusable by
others, or interoperable with other models. This training could involve
in-person workshops, webinars and virtual conferences, or training
videos.

### Coordination and Partnerships with Other Organizations  

The OMF will actively engage with other organizations supporting open,
ethical science. It will do so in order to support and promote best
practices for modeling science. This could include adopting standards
for ethical practice, identifying open access repositories for model
code and other information, and obtaining support for licensing and
related legal issues.

The OMF also will actively engage with journals that publish the results
of modeling science. It will encourage these journals to actively
support OMF standards by requiring scientists to meet these standards in
order to publish their work, and assigning digital badges or other
public recognition of authors who do so.

### Seeking Funding  

The Open Modeling Foundation, through its Administrative Directorate and
its member organizations, will seek external funding to support the
activities of the foundation.

### Additional Activities  

Depending on resource availability, the Open Modeling Foundation may
undertake other activities in support of modeling science and
scientists. Identifying, prioritizing, and coordinating such activities
will be the responsibility of the Executive Directorate and Activities
Committees. The following are examples of such activities.

============================

## Membership

The Open Modeling Foundation is comprised of organizations that include
and represent modeling scientists anywhere in the world. Any such
organization can be nominated for membership in the OMF or
self-nominate. Nominations will be evaluated by the Executive
Directorate and presented to the Membership Council for approval.
Membership is supported by donations and assume active voluntary
participation of members in the Foundation activities.

============================

## Governance  

Governance of the Open Modeling Foundation should be organized to
achieve four primary goals:

* It should enable the foundation to carry out its mission and goals, and realize its vision in the most effective way possible and with  the least necessary intervention on the part of OMF governance.

* It should provide a free and fair voice to all member scientific  communities it represents.

* It should offer opportunities for all modeling scientists to  participate and contribute to the goals and activities of the OMF.

* It should seek to maximize benefits for the scientific communities it represents and promote modeling science that benefits both human and natural systems on our planet.

The policies and activities of Open Modeling Foundation will be
administered by shared, multi-level governance, consisting on a Members
Council, Working Groups, and Executive Directorate.

### Members Council  

The Members Council is composed of 1 representative from each member
organization. The Members Council reviews and approves OMF policies and
modeling standards. It provide advices and support to the Executive
Directorate and Working Groups for carrying out governance policies,
creating and administering standards, and carrying out other activities.
It also]{style="background: transparent"} facilitates communication
between the Open Modeling Foundation and modeling scientists represented
by OMF member organization. Nominations for new members must be approved
by a majority of the Members Council.

The Members Council will meet annually in person and quarterly
virtually.

Changes to the OMF Charter requires approval by a vote of 2/3 of the
Members Council.

### Executive Directorate

Regular activities and financial management of the OMF is guided by the
Executive Directorate. The Executive Directorate is composed of an
Executive Director, two representatives elected by the Members Council,
and the Chairs of the Working Groups. The two Members Council
representatives are elected in staggered two year terms. The Executive
Director serves for renewable five year terms. The other members of the
Executive Directorate and the Members Council will create a process for
selecting an Executive Director.

The Executive Directorate ensures that the activities of the Open
Modeling Foundation are furthering its vision, mission, and goals as
expressed in this charter. It oversees all elections and any other
selection of individuals involved in foundation activities to ensure
that qualified, ethical individuals who are dedicated to the
foundation's vision, mission, and goals are chosen to fill their roles
in the foundation. It also oversees the activities committees to ensure
that they are carrying out their assigned tasks in an appropriate and
effective manner, consistent with the vision, mission, and goals of the
foundation. The Executive Directorate receives and evaluates all
nominations for membership in the Open Modeling Foundation, and submits
them to the Members Council for review and approval vote. The Executive
Directorate also manages funding and financial expenditures of the OMF,
in accordance with the foundation's vision, mission, and goals. The
Executive Directorate may propose changes to the OMF Charter for review
and approval by the Membership Council.

The Executive Directorate will meet at least quarterly each year. It
will organize Members Council meetings. The Executive Director will
chair Directorate meetings and Members Council meetings, or identify a
substitute from the Directorate if s/he is unable to do so. The
Executive Directorate may be supported by OMF staff including an
Administrative Coordinator and technical staff.

### Working Groups 

In addition to the Executive Directorate, OMF activities are guided by
Working Groups. Any modeling scientist can join a Working Group. Working
Groups will self organize, and nominate a Working Group Chair, for
approval by the Members Council. Working Group Chairs serve for a
three-year, renewable term.

#### Standards Working Group

The Standards Working Group oversees the adoption, dissemination, and
administration of OMF standards for access, documentation, reusability,
and interoperability; it may also propose additional standards. It
proposes standards to be reviewed, revised, and approved by the OMF
Members Council. The SWG works with the Executive Directorate and
Administrative Coordinator to communicate OMF standards to OMF member
organizations and other stakeholders, and solicit input from the
modeling community. It also establishs procedures to evaluate and
certify model code that meets OFM standards, working with code
repositories and scientific software journals to ensure that code review
includes OMF criteria and that OMF digital badges are awarded for models
that comply with these standards.

#### Cyberinfrastructure Working Group

The Cyberinfrastructure Working Group serves to identify or develop
tools and processes which serve to lower the technical barriers towards
adoption of the standards developed by the Standards Working Group. The
Cyberinfrastructure Working Group also identifies ways to best deploy
these tools and sufficient documentation to enable their use to modeling
scientists. This Working Group also coordinates the development and
management of the OMF Science Gateway. The CWG will be assisted by OMF
technical staff in its mission. These OMF technical staff will be de
faOutreach and Education Committee*.*

The Outreach and Education Committee will coordinate collaborative
efforts with journals, funding agencies, societies, institutions/labs,
other software/modeling consortia to diseminate and administer OMF
standards across the community of modeling science. Depending on
available resources, it also may develop and deploy educational and
training materials, organize workshops, symposia, clinics, and other
promotional or engagement events to disseminate OMF standards and help
modling scientists meet those standards. cto members of CWG, although
membership in the CWG is open to others as well.

#### Outreach and Education Working Group

The Outreach and Education Working Group will coordinate collaborative
efforts with journals, funding agencies, societies, institutions/labs,
other software/modeling consortia to diseminate and administer OMF
standards across the community of modeling science. Depending on
available resources, it also may develop and deploy educational and
training materials, organize workshops, symposia, clinics, and other
promotional or engagement events to disseminate OMF standards and help
modling scientists meet those standards. It it is specifically charged
with helping the OMF members reach and train next generation scholars
and ensure proactive outreach to groups and nationalities that are
underrepresented in modeling science This working group is supported by
the Administrative Coordinator and may be supported by OMF educational
staff.

#### Additional Working Groups 

Other Working Groups may be proposed by the Executive Directorate to
oversee and coordinate additional OMF activities. The establishment of
any new working groups must be approved by the Members Council.
